[Serverless navigation] Add documentation (#162318)
elastic/kibana: packages/shared-ux/chrome/serverless_projects_documentation.md

      - [Example](#example)
      - [Navigation tree API](#navigation-tree-api)
        - [`NavigationTreeDefinition`](#navigationtreedefinition)
        - [`GroupDefinition`](#groupdefinition)
        - [`RecentlyAccessedDefinition`](#recentlyaccesseddefinition)
    - [React components](#react-components)
      - [`unstyled`](#unstyled)
  - [Breadcrumbs](#breadcrumbs)
  - [Toolbar](#toolbar)
  - [Search bar](#search-bar)

### Building Blocks

The serverless navigation is composed of several key building blocks that work together to form a comprehensive navigation system. These building blocks include:

1. **Left Side Navigation**: Allow users to navigate through different sections of the project.
2. **Breadcrumbs**: A visual representation of the user's current location within the navigation hierarchy.
3. **Toolbar**: A customizable toolbar that provides quick access to important actions and features.
4. **Search Bar**: A search input field that enables users to quickly access specific content within the project.

In the following sections, we will explore each of these building blocks in detail.

## Left Side Navigation

> The left side navigation serves as a primary means for users to navigate through different sections of the project. There are two approaches to building the side navigation:

Reviewer: note to self: I think we should also explain the design of the nav. I think we should explain that there are predefined nav sections and pieces that we provide that can be enabled / repositioned and also that they

            {
              link: 'management',
              title: 'Management',
            },
            {
              id: 'cloudLinkUserAndRoles',
              cloudLink: 'userAndRoles', // Add an external link to Cloud
            },
            {
              id: 'cloudLinkPerformance',
              cloudLink: 'performance',
            },
          ],
        },
      ],
    },
  ],
};
```

Once the navigation tree is defined we need to

1. Pass it to the `<DefaultNavigation />` component
2. Set your navigation component in the `serverless` plugin

```tsx
import { DefaultNavigation, NavigationKibanaProvider } from '@kbn/shared-ux-chrome-navigation';

const createServerlessSearchSideNavComponent =
  (
    core: CoreStart,
    { serverless, cloud }: { serverless: ServerlessPluginStart; cloud: CloudStart }
  ) =>
  () => {
    return (
      <NavigationKibanaProvider core={core} serverless={serverless} cloud={cloud}>
        <DefaultNavigation navigationTree={navigationTree} dataTestSubj="svlSearchSideNav" />
      </NavigationKibanaProvider>
    );
  };

// plugin.ts (public) "start()"
serverless.setSideNavComponent(createComponent(core, { serverless, cloud }));
```

> #### Navigation tree API

Reviewer: I think we shouldn't focus on this, because we won't be able to maintain this manually. 
I think we should just point to the source code for API definition, make sure we have all these comments there. Also discuss with the team about how we should approach this and what is the current state. We already had some system in place that extracted api definitions to the docs (Here are some example of what we have automatically generated https://docs.elastic.dev/kibana-dev-docs/api/kibanaReact)

Instead we should focus on concepts and examples

Reviewer: Since Seb already had this nicely composed manually, I think we should keep it. I added a warning that this might be incomplete and plan to bring up to the discussion about how we should approach api reference in general (automating it)

            </Navigation.Group>
          </Navigation.Group>
        </Navigation>
      </NavigationKibanaProvider>
    );
  };
```

And as with the tree definition above you will have to set the navigation component on the `serverless` plugin.

```ts
// plugin.ts (public) "start()"
serverless.setSideNavComponent(createComponent(core, { serverless, cloud }));
```

#### `unstyled`

If you want to completely customize your UI and just need to declare you navigation tree you can pass the `unstyled` property to your `<Navigation />`.

```tsx
/**
 * This JSX will correctly declare your tree structure but will not have any UI applied.
 Tree generated:
[{
  id: 'my-group',
  title: "My Group,
  children: [{
    id: 'item-1',
    title: 'Item 1',
  }, {
    id: 'item-2',
    title: 'Item 2',
  }]
}]
 */
<Navigation unstyled>
  <Navigation.Group id="my-group" title="My group">
    <Navigation.Item id="item-1" title="Item 1">
      <div>Your custom UI</div>
    </Navigation.Item>
    <Navigation.Item id="item-2" title="Item 2">
      <div>Your custom UI</div>
    </Navigation.Item>
  </Navigation.Group>
</Navigation>
```

## Breadcrumbs

TODO

> ## Toolbar

Reviewer: @tsullivan, is there something specific we need to cover for Toolbar and Search Bar? I don't think so, but might be missing something

    - [Navigation Tree Definition](#navigation-tree-definition)
      - [Example](#example)
      - [Navigation tree API](#navigation-tree-api)
        - [`NavigationTreeDefinition`](#navigationtreedefinition)
        - [`GroupDefinition`](#groupdefinition)
        - [`RecentlyAccessedDefinition`](#recentlyaccesseddefinition)
    - [React components](#react-components)
      - [`unstyled`](#unstyled)
    - [Important concepts](#important-concepts)
      - [Deep links](#deep-links)
      - [Cloud link](#cloud-links)
      - [Preconfigured navigation sections](#preconfigured-navigation-sections)
      - [Active navigation path](#active-navigation-path)
  - [Breadcrumbs](#breadcrumbs)
  - [Toolbar](#toolbar)
  - [Global Search](#global-search)
- [Testing](#testing)

### Building Blocks

The project navigation is composed of several key building blocks that work together to form a comprehensive navigation system. These building blocks include:

1. **Left Side Navigation**: Allow users to navigate through different sections of the project.
2. **Breadcrumbs**: A visual representation of the user's current location within the navigation hierarchy.

> 3. **Toolbar**: A customizable toolbar that provides quick access to important actions and features.

Reviewer 2: Can we call it "header action menu? This has been called many things: app bar, app toolbar, app menu bar... I think "header action menu" is clear to anyone listening, and it matches the naming in the code.

4. **Global Search**: A navigational search input that enables users to quickly access specific content within the project.

In the following sections, we will explore each of these building blocks in detail.

## Left Side Navigation

> **Note**
> Left Side Navigation is available in shared_ux storybook under the `Chrome/Navigation` section. You can explore the components and their properties there.
> `yarn storybook shared_ux`

The left side navigation is a primary way for users to navigate through different sections of the project. It consists of a tree of navigation items that can be expanded and collapsed. Apart from the navigation tree it also supports special pre-built blocks like recently accessed items. The main part of the navigation tree is project's navigation - part that is fully configured and supported by the project teams (e.g. Observability). We also provide pre-configured platform sections as presets that solutions can use as part of their navigation (e.g. `ml`, `analytics`). Solutions can customize those sections to their needs.

There are two approaches to building the side navigation:

> 1. **Navigation tree definition**: Developers provide a navigation tree definition. This approach is recommended if there are no needs of custom UI outside of the existing building blocks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Navigation tree definition**: Developers provide a navigation tree definition. This approach is recommended if the use case works with the existing building blocks.
```

> 2. **React Components**: Alternatively, we provide a set of pre-built components that can be used to construct the left side navigation. These components include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **React components**: Alternatively, we provide a set of pre-built components that can be used to construct the left side navigation. These components include:
```

`<Navigation />`: The parent component that encapsulates the entire navigation area.
`<Navigation.Group />`: A component representing a group of navigation items.
`<Navigation.Item />`: A component representing an individual navigation item.
`<Navigation.Footer />`: A component for displaying additional content at the bottom of the navigation.
`<Navigation.RecentlyAccessed />`: A component for displaying a list of recently accessed items.

By leveraging these components, you can create a customized left side navigation for a serverless project.

> **Note**

> > Both approaches are mostly **identically** regarding the properties that can be passed. Some of those properties will be documented in the tree definition section below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Both approaches have an **identical set of properties** that can be passed. Some of those properties will be documented in the tree definition section below.
```

### Navigation Tree Definition

> To create your left side navigation using a tree definition you use the `NavigationTreeDefinition` interface. This interface allows you to define the complete navigation tree, including the **body** and **footer** of the navigation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the `NavigationTreeDefinition` interface to create your left side navigation using a tree definition. This interface allows you to define the complete navigation tree, including the **body** and **footer** of the navigation.
```

#### Example

Let's start by seeing an example, and we'll detail the different properties below.

```ts
import { type NavigationTreeDefinition, getPresets } from '@kbn/shared-ux-chrome-navigation';

const navigationTree: NavigationTreeDefinition = {
  body: [
    { type: 'recentlyAccessed' }, // Add the recently accessed items
    {

>       type: 'navGroup', // A top level group

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      type: 'navGroup', // A top level group for the project's navigation: the main part of the navigation tree
```

      id: 'search_project_nav',
      title: 'Elasticsearch',
      icon: 'logoElasticsearch',

>       defaultIsCollapsed: false,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      defaultIsCollapsed: false, // ensures this navigation section is auto-expanded when the user first loads the page
```

            },
            {
              id: 'cloudLinkUserAndRoles',
              cloudLink: 'userAndRoles', // Add an external link to Cloud, learn more in #cloud-links section
            },
            {
              id: 'cloudLinkPerformance',
              cloudLink: 'performance',
            },
          ],
        },
      ],
    },
  ],
};
```

Once the navigation tree is defined we need to

1. Pass it to the `<DefaultNavigation />` component
2. Set your navigation component in the `serverless` plugin

```tsx
import { DefaultNavigation, NavigationKibanaProvider } from '@kbn/shared-ux-chrome-navigation';

const createServerlessSearchSideNavComponent =
  (
    core: CoreStart,
    { serverless, cloud }: { serverless: ServerlessPluginStart; cloud: CloudStart }
  ) =>
  () => {
    return (
      <NavigationKibanaProvider core={core} serverless={serverless} cloud={cloud}>
        <DefaultNavigation navigationTree={navigationTree} dataTestSubj="svlSearchSideNav" />
      </NavigationKibanaProvider>
    );
  };

// plugin.ts (public) "start()"
serverless.setSideNavComponent(createComponent(core, { serverless, cloud }));
```

#### Navigation tree API

> **Warning**

> > The API reference is manually maintained and might be out of date. Please refer [to the source](https://github.com/sebelga/kibana/blob/project-navigation-documentation/packages/shared-ux/chrome/navigation/src/ui/types.ts) for the most up-to-date information. We are working on automating the API reference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The API reference is manually maintained and might be out of date. Please refer [to the source](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/main/packages/shared-ux/chrome/navigation/src/ui/types.ts) for the most up-to-date information, until we have automated the API reference.
```

```tsx
import { NavigationKibanaProvider, Navigation } from '@kbn/shared-ux-chrome-navigation';

const createServerlessSearchSideNavComponent =
  (
    core: CoreStart,
    { serverless, cloud }: { serverless: ServerlessPluginStart; cloud: CloudStart }
  ) =>
  () => {
    return (
      <NavigationKibanaProvider core={core} serverless={serverless} cloud={cloud}>
        <Navigation>
          <Navigation.Group id="group1" title="Group 1" defaultIsCollapsed={false}>
            <Navigation.Item id="item1" title="Item 1" />
            <Navigation.Item id="item2" title="Item 2" />
            <Navigation.Item id="item3" title="Item 3" />
          </Navigation.Group>

          <div>
            <p>Any other section you might need</p>
          </div>

          <Navigation.Group id="group2" title="Group 2">
            <Navigation.Item id="item1">
              <EuiText color="blue">Title can also be a React node</EuiText>
            </Navigation.Item>

            <Navigation.Group id="nestedGroup" title="Group can be nested">
              <Navigation.Item id="item1" title="Item 1" />
            </Navigation.Group>

>           </Navigation.Group>
>         </Navigation>

Reviewer 2: Let's add the Footer component to the example:

```suggestion
          </Navigation.Group>
          <Navigation.Footer>
            <Navigation.Group preset="devtools" />
          </Navigation.Footer>
        </Navigation>
```

      </NavigationKibanaProvider>
    );
  };
```

And as with the tree definition above you will have to set the navigation component on the `serverless` plugin.

```ts
// plugin.ts (public) "start()"
serverless.setSideNavComponent(createComponent(core, { serverless, cloud }));
```

#### `unstyled`

> If you want to completely customize your UI and just need to declare you navigation tree you can pass the `unstyled` property to your `<Navigation />`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to have a completely customized UI, without the Shared UX components, but also want the benefits of self-updating breadcrumbs (see below in the #breadcrumbs section), just declare your navigation tree and pass the `unstyled` property to your `<Navigation />`.
```

```tsx
/**
 * This JSX will correctly declare your tree structure but will not have any UI applied.
 Tree generated:
[{
  id: 'my-group',
  title: "My Group,
  children: [{
    id: 'item-1',
    title: 'Item 1',
  }, {
    id: 'item-2',
    title: 'Item 2',
  }]
}]
 */
<Navigation unstyled>
  <Navigation.Group id="my-group" title="My group">
    <Navigation.Item id="item-1" title="Item 1">
      <div>Your custom UI</div>
    </Navigation.Item>
    <Navigation.Item id="item-2" title="Item 2">
      <div>Your custom UI</div>
    </Navigation.Item>
  </Navigation.Group>
</Navigation>
```

### Important Concepts

#### Deep links

> [Deep links](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/f5034e60a501e7b61a3e1bff34e64c9b94c71344/packages/core/application/core-application-browser/src/application.ts#L281-L314) are a Kibana core's mechanism for registering sub-pages within an app. In "classic" Kibana they are used for the default side navigation, navigation APIs and the global search. Teams can register the deep links when they register their app. They can also update or remove deep links dynamically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Deep links](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/f5034e60a501e7b61a3e1bff34e64c9b94c71344/packages/core/application/core-application-browser/src/application.ts#L281-L314) are a Kibana core's mechanism for registering sub-pages within an app. In "classic" Kibana they are used for the default side navigation, navigation APIs and the global search. Teams can register the deep links when they register their app. They can also update their registered deep links, or unregister deep links dynamically.
```

> The serverless navigation API uses the same deep links mechanism to configure the navigation tree. The `link` property of the `NodeDefinition` interface refers to the deep links registered by apps. The `link` property can be either a direct app id or a deep link ID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The serverless navigation API uses the same deep links mechanism to configure the navigation tree. The `link` property of the `NodeDefinition` interface refers to the deep links registered by apps. The `link` property can be either the ID of an app, or a deep link ID.
```

#### Cloud links

The `cloudLink` property of the `NodeDefinition` interface refers to the predefined list of cloud links that are configured in `kibana.yml`.
Currently available pages are `'userAndRoles' | 'performance' | 'billingAndSub'`

```ts
import { type NavigationTreeDefinition, getPresets } from '@kbn/shared-ux-chrome-navigation';

const navigationTree: NavigationTreeDefinition = {
  body: [
    {
      type: 'navGroup',
      id: 'topNav',
      children: [
        {
          id: 'cloudLinkUserAndRoles',
          cloudLink: 'userAndRoles',
        },
        {
          id: 'cloudLinkPerformance',
          cloudLink: 'performance',
        },
      ],
    },
  ],
};
```

#### Preconfigured navigation sections

When configuring the navigation tree you can use the preconfigured sections like `devtools`, `management`, `ml`, `analytics`

```ts
import { type NavigationTreeDefinition, getPresets } from '@kbn/shared-ux-chrome-navigation';

const navigationTree: NavigationTreeDefinition = {
  body: [
    {
      type: 'navGroup',
      ...getPresets('ml'), // Insert all the machine learning links
    },
  ],
};
```

> The benefit of using the preset instead of building the sectional manually is that the team who can own the preset can update it as they see fit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The benefit of using the preset instead of building the platform-owned sections manually is that the team who can own the preset can update it as they see fit.
```

You can also customize the preset like so:

```ts

> import { type NavigationTreeDefinition, getPresets } from '@kbn/shared-ux-chrome-navigation';

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import { NodeDefinition } from '@kbn/core-chrome-browser';
import { type NavigationTreeDefinition, getPresets } from '@kbn/shared-ux-chrome-navigation';
```

const navigationTree: NavigationTreeDefinition = {
  body: [
    {
      type: 'navGroup',
      // And specific links from analytics
      ...getPresets('analytics'),
      title: 'My analytics', // Change the title
      children: getPresets('analytics').children.map((child) => ({
        ...child,
        children: child.children?.filter((item) => {
          // force remove discover and dashboard
          return item.link !== 'discover' && item.link !== 'dashboards';
        }),

>       })) as NonEmptyArray<any>,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      })) as NonEmptyArray<NodeDefinition>,
```

By default, the path matching logic uses `startsWith` against the path from the deep link and then picks the longest match. This can be overridden using `getIsActive` predicate.

```ts
import { type NavigationTreeDefinition } from '@kbn/shared-ux-chrome-navigation';

const navigationTree: NavigationTreeDefinition = {
  body: [
    {
      title: `Dashboards`,
      link: 'dashboards',
      getIsActive: ({ pathNameSerialized, prepend }) => {
        return pathNameSerialized.startsWith(prepend('/app/dashboards'));
      },
    },
  ],
};
```

Technically, multiple paths can be active simultaneously and multiple nodes can be highlighted in the side navigation. However, this is not recommended as it can be confusing for the user.

You can programmatically access the active paths using the `getActiveNavigationNodes$` method:

```ts
const activesNodes$ = pluginsStart.serverless.getActiveNavigationNodes$();
```

## Breadcrumbs

Breadcrumbs is a list of links that represent the current navigation path. Project navigation breadcrumbs are automatically generated based on the navigation tree set for the [side navigation](#left-side-navigation) and the currently active navigation path.

> Project breadcrumbs are built from 3 sections:
> 
> 🏠 > Navigation > Deeper Context

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Project breadcrumbs are built from 3 sections: 🏠 > Navigation > Deeper Context
```

> Project breadcrumbs are built from 3 sections:
> 
> 🏠 > Navigation > Deeper Context
> 
> - 🏠 > Navigation - is platform controlled automatically
> - Deeper Context - is manually controlled by projects

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Project breadcrumbs are built from 3 sections:

1. **Home link:** 🏠
2. **Platform navigation:** is automatically controlled by SharedUX services
3. **Deeper context:** is manually controlled by projects
```

### Project breadcrumbs sections

#### 🏠 Home breadcrumb

Home breadcrumb is always displayed as the first breadcrumb and leads to what project specifies as home page in `kibana.yml`.

#### Navigation breadcrumbs

Navigation breadcrumbs are automatically generated based on the navigation tree set for the [side navigation](#left-side-navigation) and the currently active navigation path.

#### Deeper context breadcrumbs

Deeper context breadcrumbs are manually controlled by projects. They are added to the breadcrumbs using the `pluginsStart.serverless.setBreadcrumbs` method.

```ts
pluginsStart.serverless.setBreadcrumbs([
  {
    text: 'Deeper Context',
    href: '/some/deeper/context',
  },
]);
```

These breadcrumbs are removed when the active navigation path changes.

### Overriding breadcrumbs

Projects can override navigation breadcrumbs. This will override navigation breadcrumbs, but will keep the Home breadcrumb:

```ts
pluginsStart.serverless.setBreadcrumbs([b1, b2, b3], { absolute: true });
```

The override is automatically reset when the active navigation path changes.

> ## Toolbar
> 
> The application toolbar is a horizontal bar that is displayed at the top of the page below the header where apps can put their custom actions.
> There is no serverless specific API or behavior changes for this: to set custom actions use the same API as in the default Kibana `setHeaderActionMenu` [source](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/188009f9376d5976b5db37e04c52a2b5bdaf9771/packages/core/application/core-application-browser/src/app_mount.ts#L176-L205).
> There might be styling and positioning changes comparing to the toolbar in the default Kibana navigation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Header Action Menu

The Header Action Menu, aka application toolbar, is a horizontal bar that is **conditionally** displayed at the top of the page below the header where apps can put their custom actions. Like the header, the toolbar has fixed position. Unlike the header however, this bar only appears when an application has registered content to show. Another UI difference, is the toolbar could be covered by flyouts or full-page overlays on the page. There might be other slight styling and positioning changes comparing to the toolbar in the default Kibana navigation.

There is no serverless specific API or behavior change for the toolbar. To set custom content in this area, use the same API as in the default Kibana `setHeaderActionMenu` [source](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/188009f9376d5976b5db37e04c52a2b5bdaf9771/packages/core/application/core-application-browser/src/app_mount.ts#L176-L205). To unset content, call `setHeaderActionMenu` with `undefined`.

> NOTE: The display of the toolbar container is conditional, based on whether there is toolbar content to show. Make sure to pass `undefined` to `setHeaderActionMenu` if there is no application content to show. In classic layout, passing an empty `span` or `div` element suffices to "clear" the toolbar, but in serverless projects, it will cause a large empty container to show below the header.
```

## Global Search

> The global search (navigational search) is a search bar that can be opened from the header. It allows users to search for apps, pages, and other resources.
> There is no serverless specific API or behavior changes for this: refer to [the global search plugin](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/bd778221dcf8b934f2947d6be3173f8a2796ef74/x-pack/plugins/global_search/README.md) to learn about the API.
> There might be styling and positioning changes comparing to the search in the default Kibana navigation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The global search (navigational search) is a search bar that can be opened from the header. It allows users to search for apps, pages, and other resources. Unlike the classic layout, the user must click a magnifying glass icon to reveal the search text input, but everything else in project layout is the same.
There is no serverless specific API or behavior changes for this: refer to [the global search plugin](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/bd778221dcf8b934f2947d6be3173f8a2796ef74/x-pack/plugins/global_search/README.md) to learn about the API.
```
